Probability

Probability defines the likelihood of occurrence of an event. 
e.g., When a coin is tossed, there are two possible outcomes: heads (H) or tails (T)



{Probability of event to happen P(E) = Number of favourable outcomes/Total Number of outcomes}

This means that the total of all the probabilities in any random test or experiment is equal to 1: P(E) + P(E’) = 1

Choosing a card from the deck of cards
Flipping a coin
Throwing a dice in the air
Winning a lucky draw


complementary events:
Two events are said to be complementary when one event occurs if and only if the other does not.


Consider the example of tossing a coin. Let P(E) denote the probability of getting a tail when a coin is tossed. Then probability of getting a head is denoted by P(E')
then, 
P(E) + P(E') = 1

the event P(E') means 'Not E'.

In general, it is true that for an event E,
    P(E') = 1 - P(E)

The event (E') , representing ‘not E’, is called the complement of the event E.
We also say that E and E' are complementary events.


    Sure Event:
the probability of an event which is sure (or certain) to occur is 1. Such an event
is called a sure event or a certain event.

    Impossible event:
That is, the probability of an event which is impossible to occur is 0. Such an
event is called an impossible event.






###Addition Rule in Probability
If A and B are two events in a probability experiment, then the probability that either one of the events will occur is:

P(A or B)=P(A)+P(B)−P(A and B)

If A and B are two mutually exclusive events: then the probability that either one of the events will occur is:




Q. A single 6-sided die is rolled. What is the probability of rolling a 2 or a 5?


1. The number rolled can be a 2.

2. The number rolled can be a 5.

Events: These events are mutually exclusive since they cannot occur at the same time.
P(A or B)=P(A)+P(B)


Experiment 5: In a math class of 30 students, 17 are boys and 13 are girls. On a unit test, 4 boys and 5 girls made an A grade. If a student is chosen at random from the class, what is the probability of choosing a girl or an A student?

Probabilities: P(girl or A) = P(girl) + P(A) - P(girl and A)

        13	  	 9 	  	 5 
 	 =  ---  +   ---  -  ----
        30	    30	    30
  
	17
 = ---- 
    30



A single 6-sided die is rolled. What is the probability of rolling a number greater than 3 or an even number?

2/3 or 0.67 or 67%




###Multiplication of Probability:

The specific multiplication rule, P(A and B) = P(A) * P(B), is only valid if the two events are independent. In other words, it only works if one event does not change the probability of the other event. e.g., Buying a book and then buying a coffee.

According to the multiplication rule of probability, the probability of occurrence of both the events A and B is equal to the product of the probability of B occurring and the conditional probability that event A occurring given that event B occurs.
    If A and B are dependent events, then the probability of both events occurring simultaneously is given by:
            P(A ∩ B) = P(B) . P(A|B)
            means “the probability of A happening given that B has occurred”.



    If A and B are two independent events in an experiment, then the probability of both events occurring simultaneously is given by:
            P(A ∩ B) = P(A) . P(B)




###Sampling Methods
Sampling is a technique of selecting individual members or a subset(sample) of the population to make statistical inferences from them and estimate characteristics of the whole population.

Sampling helps a lot in research. It is one of the most important factors which determines the accuracy of your research/survey result.


There are lot of sampling techniques which are grouped into two categories as:

a) Probability Sampling
b) Non- Probability Sampling
            The difference lies between the above two is whether the sample selection is based on randomization or not. With randomization, every element gets equal chance to be picked up and to be part of sample for study.


            ####1. Probability Sampling:
                                  This Sampling technique uses randomization to make sure that every element of the population gets an equal chance to be part of the selected sample. It’s alternatively known as random sampling.


                    Simple Random Sampling

                    Stratified sampling

                    Systematic sampling

                    Cluster Sampling

                    Multi stage Sampling



        1.) Simple Random Sampling: 


Every element has an equal chance of getting selected to be the part sample. It is used when we don’t have any kind of prior information about the target population.

For example: Random selection of 20 students from class of 50 student. Each student has equal chance of getting selected. Here probability of selection is 1/50


        2.) Stratified Sampling:

This technique divides the elements of the population into small subgroups (strata) based on the similarity in such a way that the elements within the group are homogeneous and heterogeneous among the other subgroups formed. And then the elements are randomly selected from each of these strata. We need to have prior information about the population to create subgroups.

        3.) Cluster Sampling

Our entire population is divided into clusters or sections and then the clusters are randomly selected. All the elements of the cluster are used for sampling. Clusters are identified using details such as age, sex, location etc.

Cluster sampling can be done in following ways:

                  · Single Stage Cluster Sampling

Entire cluster is selected randomly for sampling.

            .Two Stage Cluster Sampling

Here first we randomly select clusters and then from those selected clusters we randomly select elements for sampling


            4.)Systematic Clustering

Here the selection of elements is systematic and not random except the first element. Elements of a sample are chosen at regular intervals of population. All the elements are put together in a sequence first where each element has the equal chance of being selected.

For a sample of size n, we divide our population of size N into subgroups of k elements.

We select our first element randomly from the first subgroup of k elements.


            5.) Multi-Stage Sampling

It is the combination of one or more methods described above.

Population is divided into multiple clusters and then these clusters are further divided and grouped into various sub groups (strata) based on similarity. One or more clusters can be randomly selected from each stratum. This process continues until the cluster can’t be divided anymore. For example country can be divided into states, cities, urban and rural and all the areas with similar characteristics can be merged together to form a strata.




                ####2. Non-Probability Sampling

It does not rely on randomization. This technique is more reliant on the researcher’s ability to select elements for a sample. Outcome of sampling might be biased and makes difficult for all the elements of population to be part of the sample equally. This type of sampling is also known as non-random sampling.

            Convenience Sampling

            Purposive Sampling

            Quota Sampling

            Referral /Snowball Sampling


    1.) Convenience Sampling:
A convenience sample simply includes the individuals who happen to be most accessible to the researcher. Here the samples are selected based on the availability. This method is used when the availability of sample is rare and also costly. This is an easy and inexpensive way to gather initial data. So based on the convenience samples are selected.

If you are doing a research survey and you work at a university, for example, a convenience sample might consist of students or co-workers who happen to be on campus with free time who are willing to take your questionnaire.


    2.) Purposive Sampling:
This is based on the intention or the purpose of study. Only those elements will be selected from the population which suits the best for the purpose of our study.

For Example: If we want to understand the thought process of the people who are interested in pursuing master’s degree then the selection criteria would be “Are you interested for Masters in..?”

All the people who respond with a “No” will be excluded from our sample.

Participants for the sample are chosen consciously by researchers based on their knowledge and understanding of the research question at hand or their goals. Also known as judgment sampling


    3.) Quota Sampling:
This type of sampling depends of some pre-set standard. It selects the representative sample from the population. Proportion of characteristics/ trait in sample should be same as population. Elements are selected until exact proportions of certain types of data is obtained or sufficient data in different categories is collected.

For example: If our population has 45% females and 55% males then our sample should reflect the same percentage of males and females.
 For example, your quota might include a certain number of males and a certain number of females, or people in certain age brackets or ethnic groups.


    4.) Referral /Snowball Sampling:
This technique is used in the situations where the population is completely unknown and rare.
Therefore we will take the help from the first element which we select for the population and ask him to recommend other elements who will fit the description of the sample needed.
So this referral technique goes on, increasing the size of population like a snowball.


For example: It’s used in situations of highly sensitive topics like HIV Aids where people will not openly discuss and participate in surveys to share information about HIV Aids.
Not all the victims will respond to the questions asked so researchers can contact people they know or volunteers to get in touch with the victims and collect information
Helps in situations where we do not have the access to sufficient people with the characteristics we are seeking. It starts with finding people to study.
